PolitiFact | Now you know: ‘ABCs test’ for presidents isn’t real

Our only agenda is to publish the truth so you can be an informed participant in democracy.
We need your help.


More Info

Giving new meaning to a Presidential Fitness Test, a recent Instagram post says that each U.S. president is subject to a pop quiz during their term: singing the ABCs.
"Did you know that every time a president is elected to serve a term a person is assigned to randomly select a day throughout their term to get the president to sing their ABCs," a narrator says in the video. "This is in order to make sure the president is still able to think properly. Fun fact: Joe Biden was the first president to fail in the last 100 years."
This post was flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Meta, which owns Facebook and Instagram.)
Watching the Instagram post’s full video makes clear this is a joke, complete with a purported quote from Biden delivered in a voice that sounds like the president crossed with Wooderson, Matthew McConaughey’s character in the movie "Dazed and Confused."
"Hey, I was too faded," the voice that is supposed to be Biden — but isn’t Biden — says. "I had just hit a blinker and my ass was fried man, I mean, I didn’t know p comes before q like when the f--- did that happen? This is some bulls---."
Presidents aren’t required to undergo annual health exams, or publicize the results of those exams, but it’s become customary since then-President Richard Nixon did,
In February, the White House physician said Biden received his first physical exam in a year and a half and declared him a "healthy, vigorous 80-year-old male who is fit to successfully execute the duties of the presidency." 
As you might expect, we found no evidence to support the claim that a White House staffer is tapped to choose any day in a president’s term to get the commander in chief to sing the alphabet song, nor that Biden was the first president in 100 years to fail. 
We rate that claim Pants on Fire!
Instagram post, March 16, 2023
Popular Science, Your mile times from the Presidential Fitness Test may be part of national history, Nov. 24, 2021
USA Today, Biden remains 'healthy, vigorous 80-year-old,' White House doctor says after physical exam, Feb. 17, 2023
The Associated Press, U.S. presidents not required to undergo annual physical exam, June 12, 2019


The Principles of the Truth-O-Meter



In a world of wild talk and fake news, help us stand up for the facts.



Sign me up





Sign me up




District of Columbia



1800 I Street NW

Washington, DC
20006



Florida


801 3rd St. S

St. Petersburg, FL
33701
727-821-9494
