PolitiFact | Climate activist Greta Thumberg wasn’t banned from Twitter; just check her feed

Our only agenda is to publish the truth so you can be an informed participant in democracy.
We need your help.


More Info


Swedish climate campaigner Greta Thunberg smiles during an interview with the Associated Press in Erkelenz, Germany, Saturday, Jan. 14, 2023. (AP)

A website called simply "Elon Musk" with a heart emoji recently purported to report on some breaking news about the Twitter CEO and self-described "free speech" supporter.
"Just in: Elon Musk bans Greta Thunberg from Twitter," reads the headline. The undated story says Musk banned the climate activist from the social media platform because he was "fed up with Thunberg’s frequent tweets about climate change" and disabled her account.
This post, shared on Facebook on March 9, was flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Meta, which owns Facebook and Instagram.)
Thunberg’s Twitter account has not been disabled. She retweeted multiple tweets on March 14, and we found no evidence that she ever stopped tweeting. There are no news reports to corroborate this claim. Plus, the story in the blog post originated on a satire site seven days earlier. 
The Elon Musk blog post circulating on social media now contains no such caveats.
In December, Musk declared Thunberg "cool." 
We rate claims that Musk blocked Thunberg False.
Blog post, March 9, 2023
Blog post, March 7, 2023
Insider, Elon Musk thinks Greta Thunberg is 'cool' after her Twitter spat with Andrew Tate, Dec. 31, 2022
Greta Thunberg Twitter account, visited March 14, 2023


The Principles of the Truth-O-Meter



In a world of wild talk and fake news, help us stand up for the facts.



Sign me up





Sign me up




District of Columbia



1800 I Street NW

Washington, DC
20006



Florida


801 3rd St. S

St. Petersburg, FL
33701
727-821-9494
