PolitiFact | Russian posters showing Biden direct people to U.S. Embassy, not ‘dementia care facilities’

Our only agenda is to publish the truth so you can be an informed participant in democracy.
We need your help.


More Info

President Joe Biden’s detractors regularly claim that he’s mentally unfit to lead the country. But are Russian dementia care facilities using Biden to tout their services? 
"Russian dementia care facilities are using Biden on their poster," reads a screenshot of a March 11 tweet showing two posters alongside what looks like a city street.  
The posters show a photo of Biden hugging Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy on Biden’s recent trip to Kyiv. They also feature Russian text and a phone number. 
An Instagram post sharing the screenshot was flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Meta, which owns Facebook and Instagram.)
Using Google Translate, we found a couple of loose translations of the text in the posters: "Elderly people need attention," "Call right now," and "help center for elderly dementia."
But the number on the post doesn’t lead to a dementia care facility, as the tweet claims. 
Rather, it’s an emergency number that Americans in Russia can use to reach the U.S. Embassy and Consulates in Russia.
We don’t know the origin of these posters, but we’ve seen similar claims before. In 2019, we fact-checked a false claim that New York City sanitation ads were insulting supporters of former President Donald Trump. In that case, the posters were not associated with the city government but were the satirical work of an unauthorized graphic artist.
Considering that the phone number on these Russian-language posters is not for a dementia care facility, as the post claimed, but for the U.S. government, we rate this post False.
Instagram post, March 12, 2023
PolitiFact, No, these aren’t real NYC Sanitation ads, Nov. 6, 2019
NBC News, Photos: President Biden makes historic visit to war-torn Ukraine, Feb. 20, 2023
Tweet, March 11, 2023
U.S. Embassy & Consulates in Russia, Emergency Contacts – All Locations, visited March 13, 2023


The Principles of the Truth-O-Meter



In a world of wild talk and fake news, help us stand up for the facts.



Sign me up





Sign me up




District of Columbia



1800 I Street NW

Washington, DC
20006



Florida


801 3rd St. S

St. Petersburg, FL
33701
727-821-9494
