PolitiFact | Ditch those crucifixes; video doesn’t prove Secret Service agents are demons

Our only agenda is to publish the truth so you can be an informed participant in democracy.
We need your help.


More Info

Idle hands are the devil’s workshop, as the saying goes, but a video circulating on social media that focuses on the hands of two U.S. Secret Service agents isn’t evidence they’re demons. 
"They are demons who came from the under world take human form and rule our world," a recent Facebook post of the video says.
In the video, the hands of two Secret Service agents walking behind former first lady Melania Trump are circled. Footage of other people follows, including a video of President Joe Biden that focuses on something slipping from his sleeve. Some social media users claimed it was a serpent, proving Biden isn’t human. But it was a rosary he wears in remembrance of his late son, Beau Biden.
This post was flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Meta, which owns Facebook and Instagram.)
The video doesn’t offer evidence for why these Secret Service agents are supposedly demons, though the hands of one of the agents have come under scrutiny before. The video clip is from former President Donald Trump’s Inauguration Day. In 2017, The Daily Mail. Inside Edition and others reported on false claims that the agent was wearing prosthetic hands so he could hold a gun under his coat. Video footage of the event disproved this rumor, showing his hands in motion and not stiffly at his sides. 
And earlier this year, we fact-checked a claim that the Secret Service agent was actually John F. Kennedy Jr. — who is dead — in disguise. 
That was wrong and so is this claim. 
We rate it Pants on Fire!
Facebook post, March 13, 2023
PolitiFact, No, JFK Jr. didn’t attend Donald Trump’s inauguration, Jan. 12, 2023
PolitiFact, No, this video doesn’t prove Biden isn’t human, March 22, 2021
The Daily Mail, Sorry folks, they WERE his real hands: Footage emerges disproving bizarre theory Trump's bodyguard had fake arms so he could hold a gun under his coat, Jan. 25, 2017
Inside Edition, Did Secret Service Agent Wear a Fake Hand to Inauguration so He Could Conceal a Weapon?, Jan. 25, 2017
The New York Times, "Bodies from Kennedy crash are found," July 22, 1999
CliffsNotes, John Galt, visited Jan. 12, 2023


The Principles of the Truth-O-Meter



In a world of wild talk and fake news, help us stand up for the facts.



Sign me up





Sign me up




District of Columbia



1800 I Street NW

Washington, DC
20006



Florida


801 3rd St. S

St. Petersburg, FL
33701
727-821-9494
